Strategic Plan     
2017 – 2022TALENT, DISCOVERY, 
AND TRANSFORMATION

01 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022We put our university community to work 
discovering answers to the problems that 
confound our world, and to help transform  
Irish society so that it ranks among the best  
in the world. 
This Strategic Plan is our road map for the next 
five years as we deliver on our promises to our 
students, our staff and our society. The plan is 
built on our values of caring about the calibre and character of our graduates. They benefit 
as individuals and we benefit as a community 
when their university education has prepared them well for a technologically sophisticated 
knowledge economy in which they are 
encouraged to be creative and effective problem-solvers. Those benefits are intensified 
when they draw from the well of decent social 
values which DCU exemplifies and lives by. 
Our commitment to the socially disadvantaged 
and our determination to give everyone the chance to shine is captured by our Access 
programme, the biggest of its kind in Ireland. 
Our responsibility to the coming generations  
is realised in the massive investment we have 
made in creating Ireland’s first Faculty of 
Education. Our graduate teachers will be world-class and their pupils will receive the  
gift of a wonderful life-enhancing education, the single most important basic investment any society can make. Our concern for improving 
Irish society and enhancing the human 
condition will be expressed in the many ways that our university research community tackles 
problems such as dementia, cancer diagnosis, 
bullying, conflict resolution and a host of other issues that demand our attention and our 
capacity for generating solutions. Our belief  
in this University’s role as an innovator and as  
a bridge to enterprise and business is expressed in the remarkable campus phenomenon that is 
DCU Alpha, DCU’s Innovation Campus. 
This five-year strategy is not just a plan, it is  
a promise to our people and our place. I look 
forward to seeing it unfold and to marvelling  
at the momentum it will generate, the talent it will harness, the discoveries it will reveal and the transformation it will effect – a university at its 
absolute best.
Dr. Martin McAleese  
Chancellor,  
Dublin City University
It is the core mission 
of Dublin City 
University to  
unlock the talent  
of our students. CHANCELLOR’S FOREWORD

02   01 Chancellor’s Foreword
04 – 05 President’s Introduction
06 – 09  Context: Institutional, National, Global 
10 – 11 Key Themes
12 – 13  Mission, Vision, Culture and Values
16 – 17 Strategic Goals
18 – 21  1    Provide a transformative  
student experience
22 – 25 2    Advance our reputation for  
world-class research
26 – 29 3    Sustain our ambitions  
through income generation
30 – 33 4    Ensure a coherent, connected  
university
34 – 37 5    Value and develop our  
staff community 
38 – 41 6   Develop a global university
42 – 45 7    Nurture creativity and culture  
across the university
46 – 49 8   Place sustainability at the core  
of the university
50 – 53 9    Pursue active engagement  
with our communities
54 – 55 Implementation Process
56 Notes

In tackling the 
challenges of an era of unprecedented change, we see unprecedented opportunities: not only  
to transform the lives of those who will pass through our doors, but also, through them and through our innovation, to transform society as  
a whole.
03 Dublin City University Strategic Plan  2017 – 2022
04   President’s Introduction
I am very pleased to introduce “Talent, 
Discovery, and Transformation”, Dublin City 
University’s Strategic Plan 2017-2022, and my 
second Strategic Plan as President of DCU.  
The last five years has been a period of dramatic 
change for DCU, for Ireland, and for the world. 
DCU is now a very different institution to the one that existed in 2012, at the beginning of our 
last Strategic Plan. With new campuses, a new 
Faculty of Education, an expanded disciplinary profile, a dramatic growth in our student 
numbers, and more, we are now in a much 
stronger position to address the opportunities and challenges of Higher Education in the  
21
st Century and to reinforce our reputation  
as a university of global significance. Ireland 
has come through a turbulent and challenging 
period but it too has emerged in a much better position. Our economy has moved from 
austerity through recovery and has now 
returned to a state of consistent high growth. Our nation can look to the future with a good 
deal more confidence, albeit with significant 
geopolitical challenges on the horizon. Globally, we are witnessing a time of unprecedented 
change and there are no signs of this dynamic 
abating soon. Globalisation has led to major new challenges and opportunities across the 
world. Organisations everywhere are 
considering their response in this context. 
Our purpose must 
surely be to address  
the major challenges facing the world today  
and to develop the talent and knowledge  
that society needs.PRESIDENT’S INTRODUCTION
05 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022This applies not least to Higher Education 
institutions, many of which are re-examining 
their purpose and relevance. 
DCU has never been a place of formulaic 
responses and we have always had a distinctive 
view of the role of a modern, global university. This is not distinctiveness for its own sake, 
however. Rather, it is distinctiveness with 
purpose. As institutions strive to define their role in a rapidly changing world, it is more important 
than ever before to be clear about that purpose, 
our values, our relevance and our ambitions. 
Our purpose must surely be to address the 
major challenges facing the world today  
and to develop the talent and knowledge  
that society needs. As an ambitious Higher Education institution, we will continue to strive to be at the forefront, promoting discovery  
and the translation of knowledge to advance society, fostering the development of talent that can flourish and add value in the evolving 
workplace and in wider society, and focusing  
on creativity and the innovation required to 
complement and leverage the constant march 
of technology.
In this Strategic Plan, we look ahead to the next 
five years and outline what will shape and drive 
our approach: the principles and values that will continue to define us, the key themes 
(Talent, Discovery, Creativity, Society, 
Technology and Sustainability) that will  
provide the framework for our approach,  
and the major goals against which we will  
track our success. In short, it is a summary  
of how, by being purposefully different and 
consistently pursuing excellence, we will play  
a globally-significant role in addressing the 
challenges and opportunities of this era. DCU 
will be a place that nurtures discovery and our 
research will be renowned for both its excellence and its focus on societal needs. Our students 
will benefit from our distinctive approach to 
learning and our belief in nurturing the talents of the whole person. We will develop the citizens and leaders that the world needs.  
We will ensure that our graduates can pursue 
lives rich with purpose. Employers and society 
will benefit from graduates that are resilient and accomplished, open and self-aware, 
innovative and adaptable. We will foster  
a culture of creativity and, in particular, 
promote the exploration of possibilities  
arising at the intersections of the creative  
arts and technological innovation.  
Our prioritisation of sustainability  
as a key theme reflects not only our  
commitment to address a critical, global challenge but also our realisation of the 
messages we convey as an exemplar 
organisation to both our students and  
society around us.
So, in tackling the challenges of an era of 
unprecedented change, we see unprecedented 
opportunities: not only to transform the lives of 
those who will pass through our doors, but also, through them and through our innovation,  
to transform society as a whole. We will be a University of Transformation and a University of Enterprise. DCU will maintain its purposeful 
differentiation, combined with its consistent 
commitment to excellence. Over the course  
of the next five years, this will be central to  
our success.
Professor Brian MacCraith,  
President,  
Dublin City University

06   Context: Institutional, National, GlobalInstitutional Context
Dublin City University is widely recognised as  
a dynamic and innovative institution that is 
distinguished both by the quality and impact  
of its graduates and by its focus on the 
translation of knowledge into societal and 
economic benefit. Excellence in its education 
and research activities has led to its ranking  
in the top 1.5% of universities globally. It is 
regarded as one of the world’s leading young 
universities (i.e. those established in the last fifty years) by virtue of its regular inclusion in 
the global rankings of such universities (QS Top 
50 under 50; THE 100 under 50).
Having grown its student population by more 
than 50% in the past five years, DCU is Ireland’s fastest growing university and today (2017) 
hosts more than 17,000 students across its 
three academic campuses (DCU Glasnevin Campus; DCU St. Patrick’s Campus; DCU All 
Hallows Campus). With five campuses in total 
(three focussed on Academic matters, one on Innovation, and one on Sports) in close proximity, 
DCU now has a substantial footprint in the 
Glasnevin-Drumcondra region of North Dublin. In 2016, the University announced a €240m, 
five-year Campus Development Plan involving 
the construction of new lecture theatres, teaching laboratories, research facilities, 
student accommodation and a major student 
centre that will open in 2018.
In a development of major significance for 
education in Ireland, DCU established the nation’s first university Faculty of Education  
in 2016. By incorporating leading colleges of education (St. Patrick’s College, Drumcondra; Mater Dei Institute of Education; Church of 
Ireland College of Education) into the university 
and by combining these with DCU’s School of Education Studies, the university has assembled 
the largest community of educational expertise 
on the island. The DCU Institute of Education is home to internationally-recognised experts in 
teaching and learning who prepare world-class 
teachers for all levels of the education continuum (from early childhood onwards) in a research-
intensive environment. A further beneficial 
consequence of the incorporation process  
was a significant expansion of DCU’s Faculty  
of Humanities and Social Sciences and a broadening of its disciplinary offerings.  
This faculty is now DCU’s largest.
With a strong commitment to research 
excellence across its five faculties (Science  
and Health, Humanities and Social Sciences, Engineering and Computing, DCU Business School, and DCU Institute of Education), the 
university is home to a number of internationally 
-renowned research centres in specific areas of Science, Engineering, ICT, Humanities, Social 
Sciences, Education and Business. As Ireland’s 
University of Enterprise, DCU is renowned  
for its commitment to innovation and 
entrepreneurship and its proactive 
engagement with the enterprise sector.  
The establishment in 2016 of Ireland’s first 
Fraunhofer Project Centre at DCU is an 
endorsement of the quality of its engagement in that regard. DCU consistently leads the Irish 
university sector in terms of Intellectual 
Property (IP) licences and contributes strongly to the national innovation ecosystem through CONTEXT:  
INSTITUTIONAL, NATIONAL, GLOBAL 

07 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
DCU Invent (DCU’s Commercialisation and 
Industry Interface unit), DCU Ryan Academy 
for Entrepreneurs and DCU Alpha (the 
University’s successful Innovation Campus).
In terms of its international profile, DCU 
focuses strongly on both the attraction of international students to our campuses in 
Dublin and Trans-National Education (TNE) 
delivery. DCU had 3,020 registered students holding non-Irish passports in 2017.  
These students came from 110 different nations. This diversity adds significantly to  
a rich, multicultural experience for all our on-
campus students. Over the period of our last 
Strategic Plan, DCU has also made significant developments in TNE. In particular, we have 
developed a partnership with PNU (Princess 
Nourah Bint Abdul Rahman University) in Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia whereby 
DCU Business School staff deliver DCU-
accredited programmes to DCU-registered students on the PNU Campus. At the time of 
writing, the delivery of additional degree 
programmes at PNU by the Faculty of Engineering and Computing and the Faculty  
of Science and Health was about to commence as was an expansion of DCU TNE activity in other parts of the Middle East.
During the period of our last Strategic Plan,  
the University implemented key strategic 
objectives concerning online education in 
recognition of its increasingly important role  
in both the delivery and enhancement of 
learning in Higher Education. In particular,  
we appointed Ireland’s first Chair in Digital 
Learning (Prof. Mark Brown) and established, 
under his leadership, the National Institute for 
Digital Learning. This has led to significant developments in Technology-Enhanced 
Learning (TEL) and Open Learning at DCU, 
including our new online platform, ‘DCU Connected’. Such developments will continue 
within the framework of this Strategic Plan.
At DCU we are committed to educational 
opportunity and believe strongly that ability, 
not means, should be the determining factor regarding access to Higher Education. With 
this in mind, the DCU Access programme was 
established more than two decades ago.  In 2017, DCU supported nearly 1,300 access students, making it the largest such programme 
by far in any Irish university. The programme is 
highly successful as measured by completion rates and employment success for our Access 
graduates. The programme relies hugely on  
the generosity of our supporters who donate 
substantial amounts annually through our 
foundation, DCU Educational Trust.
DCU’s values of inclusion and equality are also 
reflected in a number of important initiatives 
developed and established within the period  
of the last Strategic Plan, and which will 
continue into this one. For example, in 2013 
DCU established the concept of the Age-Friendly University and became the world’s  
first university to adopt this brand. This model,  
and the associated generic principles,  
has subsequently been adopted by many 
universities across the world (on four continents). 
In 2015, DCU announced its Women in Leadership plan with a view to addressing  
the issue of gender inequality at higher grades of appointment in the University. A suite of initiatives followed and DCU continues to make 
steady progress in this regard, as reflected by 
the achievement of the Athena SWAN Bronze award in 2017. In December 2017, DCU became 
Ireland’s first University of Sanctuary in 
recognition of the range of supports it has established to aid the refugee and immigrant 
community in Ireland. A number of initiatives, 
including on-campus and online scholarships, has been developed and more will be added  
as the initiative progresses.
Over the course of the last five years, DCU has 
both developed and expanded a number of 
important inter-institutional partnerships,  
both national and international. Such 
partnerships are strategically important in 
leveraging complementary expertise and in stimulating collaborative projects of mutual 
benefit. Within our region, DCU continues to  
be an active participant in the 3U Partnership 
(along with Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland 
[RCSI] and Maynooth University) and the 
MEND (Mid-East and North Dublin) Regional Cluster (involving Maynooth University, 
Athlone IT, Dundalk IT and DCU). In addition, 
DCU has a strategic partnership with Dundalk IT, with both institutions sharing a focus on 
developing the Eastern/M1 corridor region. 
Similarly, DCU has a strategic partnership  
with Ulster University, reflecting a particular 
emphasis for both institutions on cross-border 
engagement. On the international front,  
DCU’s most significant strategic relationship  
is with Arizona State University (ASU).  
The Transatlantic Higher Education Partnership with ASU continues to be  
DCU’s most significant and most successful inter-institutional partnership.
The DCU Access programme was 
established more than two decades ago. In 2017 , DCU supported nearly 1,300 access students, making it the largest such programme by far in any Irish university.

National Context
The current strategic framework for Higher 
Education (HE) in Ireland derives largely from 
the National Strategy for Higher Education to 
2030  (the so-called Hunt Report, published in 
2011). This sets out a long-term vision of Higher Education as a national driver of innovation, 
competitiveness, and academic excellence.  
It takes into account the challenges facing 
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in coping 
with the transition to mass participation in HE that has occurred over the last four decades. 
For example, there were only 31,000 HE 
students in Ireland in 1976, while in 2016 there were 220,000. The Hunt Report identifies a 
range of priorities with regard to widening 
participation, the student experience, the quality of teaching, research and innovation, 
engagement, and internationalisation.  
The report also placed a major emphasis on  
the restructuring of the Higher Education sector (with a consequent reduction in the number of 
HEIs) and the formation of regional clusters. DCU has played a key role in embracing these 
latter two priorities, with the completion of the 
Incorporation Process in October 2016 
(whereby three HEIs were integrated into DCU) 
and our active participation in the highly-regarded MEND Regional Cluster. 
Following the Hunt Report, the next major HE 
strategy document of significance is Towards a 
Future Higher Education Landscape  (published 
in 2012), which set out pathways and criteria for 
Technological University designation. The first 
of the Technological Universities in Ireland is 
likely to emerge in the period of this Strategic Plan (2017-22) and this will certainly change the 
HE landscape significantly. There was also a
commitment to move towards a national 
Performance Framework in order to make 
institutions accountable for delivering on 
national priorities as set down by Government (via The Department of Education and Skills 
– DES) with funding linked to the achievement 
of these objectives. This developed into a formal process of Strategic Dialogue and 
Institutional Compacts, where three-year  
plans for delivering on seven key policy 
objectives were agreed with individual HEIs  
and monitored via an annual process with the Higher Education Authority (HEA). To date, DCU has performed well in this process, as 
evidenced by feedback from the HEA. The first 
compact cycle began in 2014 and runs until the end of 2017. Details of a new compact cycle and performance objectives are expected shortly but were not available at the time of writing.  
It is clear, however, that performance-based funding will be a core element of the HE system for the period of this Strategic Plan. Moreover, 
a current HEA-coordinated process leading to 
reform of the Funding Allocation Model for HEIs has not yet reached its formal conclusion 
and it too is expected to be phased in to the HE 
funding landscape from 2017 onwards.
Issues around the Funding Allocation Models 
and Performance-based Funding are dwarfed, however, by the major funding crisis facing all 
Irish HEIs. This is captured clearly and accurately 
in the Cassells Report, Investing in National Ambition: a Strategy for Funding Higher 
Education published in July 2016. This report, 
produced by a Government-appointed Expert Group chaired by Peter Cassells, sets out the 
case for a significant injection of resources into 
the HE system. It highlights the pivotal role of HE in Ireland “at the heart of an enormous 
economic and societal transformation”.  
The report recognises the scale of the coming 
demographic changes and states clearly that 
Ireland cannot continue to increase student 
numbers without increasing investment.  
It is also important to note here the report’s 
recommendation that additional funding of 
€600m per annum needs to be provided by 2021 in order to maintain quality outcomes  
and to provide for increased demand.  
Although the report identifies three potential sources of additional funding (the state, the 
student and employers), at the time of writing 
no Government decision has been made with regards to addressing the HE funding crisis. 
Clearly, any such decision will have a major 
bearing on the environment in which this Strategic Plan proceeds.
A range of other strategy documents, the 
implementation of which will have a significant 
impact on the HE system over the period of this 
Strategic Plan, have been published in recent years. These documents emphasise the role of 
HEIs in delivering on national objectives with 
regard to widening participation, research  
and innovation, skills development, 
internationalisation, and gender equality:
 ― The National Plan for Equity of Access to 
Higher Education 2015-19 sets new and 
increased targets for participation in HE.
 ― The National Skills Strategy 2025  
focuses strongly on the upskilling of  
the existing workforce via part-time  
and online provision.
There were only 31,000 HE students 
in Ireland in 1976, while in 2016 there were 220,000.08   Context: Institutional, National, Global
09 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022 ― Innovation 2020  emphasises increased 
collaboration with industry and further 
development in postgraduate provision, 
along with the building of greater research capability in institutions. It also 
sets significant targets for Irish HEIs in 
attracting Horizon 2020 funding.
 ― Irish Educated, Globally Connected  
is the current national strategy for 
International Education. It sets ambitious 
targets for significant increases in 
international student numbers.
 ― The National Review of Gender Equality 
in Irish Higher Education Institutions  
recommends the linkage of performance 
funding to achievements in gender 
equality in HEIs. 
The various strategies summarised in this section highlight the diverse priorities and responsibilities that have to be addressed  
by DCU in a challenging, underfunded environment. It is important to emphasise, however, that a combination of DCU’s 
distinctive Values, Mission, and Strategic 
Goals, as outlined in this Strategic Plan,  
confer a high degree of alignment with the 
national priorities articulated in the above-
mentioned documents.
Global Context
The global landscape for HE has changed dramatically in recent decades. While there  
are regional and national variations, of course, there is a high degree of commonality with respect to the issues facing universities across 
the globe. Mass participation and continued 
growth in numbers, developments in online education and other impacts of technology, 
inexorable rising costs, the expectations of 
students, and the emergence of highly 
publicised and poorly understood global 
ranking systems are all exerting significant pressures on universities, pressures that were 
not encountered by such institutions fifty  
years ago.
Moreover, major issues such as globalisation, 
geopolitical developments (including populism and mass migration), global challenges relating 
to climate change, energy and sustainability 
more generally, automation and media reliability require universities to implement 
substantial changes in curricular content in 
order to maintain relevance. 
Public universities, in particular, have 
transitioned from being regarded as a  
general ‘public good’, and left largely to 
determine their own strategic development,  to now being essential instruments of 
government policy, especially in areas such  
as contributions to national and/or regional economic competitiveness, skills development in the workforce, and attraction of foreign 
direct investment. With rapid developments  
in technology (Artificial Intelligence, Data 
Analytics, Machine Translation, Cognitive 
Computing etc.), labour markets are changing 
rapidly and HEIs are expected to follow. Moreover, the requirement for continuous 
upskilling of the workforce has meant that 
flexible provision for lifelong learners and development of formal or informal credentials 
are now major issues for universities globally.
The expectations of 
students, and the emergence of highly publicised and poorly understood global ranking systems are all exerting significant pressures on universities. 
In many countries, including Ireland, funding 
the increasing costs of massified HE systems 
remains the major challenge. Governments  
are faced with the dilemma of prioritising 
investments in HE over areas such as healthcare, 
the ageing population, and broader public 
services and utilities. Unsurprisingly in such circumstances, universities themselves are 
increasingly expected to make stronger social 
and economic cases for public support and to establish ‘renewed public legitimacy’. In the 
words of Professor Bert van der Zwaan, Vice 
Chancellor of Utrecht University, in his 2017 book Higher Education in 2040:
“ The university of the future will derive its right 
to existence from being active in the world 
and by producing knowledge for the world.” 
This vision for the ‘engaged university’ applies now and DCU has embraced the concept 
comprehensively in this Strategic Plan.
10   Key ThemesThere are six key themes that are 
central to our Strategic Plan and  
that inform our Strategic Goals. 
KEY THEMES
11 Dublin City University Strategic Plan  2017 – 2022T alent
Discovery
Creativity
Society
T echnology
Sustainability
Mission
VisionTo transform lives 
and societies through 
education, research, 
innovation, and engagement.
DCU will be a  
globally-significant University of Transformation  
and Enterprise that  
is renowned for:—  the development  
of talent,
—  the discovery and 
translation of 
knowledge to  
advance society,
—  its focus on creativity 
and innovation,
—  the advancement 
and application of technology, and
—  its commitment to sustainability.12   Mission, Vision, Culture and ValuesMISSION, VISION, CULTURE AND VALUES
13 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Culture and Values
We foster a culture that is:
 —  Open 
 —  Collegial 
 —  Collaborative
 —  Student-focussed
 —  Ambitious
We are committed to: —  Equality
 —   Educational opportunity
 —  Social justice
 —  Ethical behaviour
 —  Academic freedom
14   

15 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
By being purposefully 
different and consistently pursuing excellence, we will play a globally-significant role  
in addressing the challenges and opportunities of  
this era.
16   Strategic Goals
1
23
4
5
Value and develop  
our staff communityProvide a transformative 
student experience
Advance our reputation  
for world-class research
Sustain our ambitions  
through income generation
Ensure a coherent, connected  
universitySTRATEGIC GOALS
At the heart of our Strategic Plan  
are the nine Strategic Goals against  
which we will track our success.
17 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
6
789Develop a global university
Nurture creativity and  
culture across the university
Place sustainability at the core 
of the university
Pursue active engagement with 
our communitiesAt the heart of our Strategic Plan  
are the nine Strategic Goals against  
which we will track our success.

18   Strategic Goals
STRATEGIC GOAL1Provide a 
transformative student experience
19 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Our commitment to our students  
is that we will prepare them well  
to flourish in the world outside  
the university: in their personal lives, 
in civic society, and in the rapidly evolving workplace.  
The development of talent is a central theme in 
this Strategic Plan. Strategic Goal 1 focuses on 
the realisation of the potential in every student 
while taking account of a very dynamic external environment. Our commitment to  
our students is that we will prepare them well  
to flourish in the world outside the university:  
in their personal lives, in civic society, and in the 
rapidly evolving workplace. This commitment 
requires a multi-faceted, multi-dimensional approach. The Specific Actions underpinning 
Strategic Goal 1 include a comprehensive 
review of our curricula with a view to broadening the thinking skills of our students and to 
enhancing their learning experience.  
We will also take steps to assure the quality  
of teaching in the University.
We will place a particular emphasis on the 
development of multi-dimensional skills in  
our students through a range of initiatives.  
The university experience outside the formal learning spaces is a critically important
part of student development.
 With this in mind, we will introduce a range of 
initiatives that encourage student participation, 
engagement in extra-curricular activities, volunteering, and physical activity. Our Healthy 
Campus initiative will address both physical 
and mental wellbeing. With a particular focus on the transition into university life, but also 
addressing the full student life-cycle, we will 
introduce an enhanced student support system that will extend all the way to the alumni stage.
DCU has a well-established reputation for its 
outreach and access services for school leavers 
from socially- and economically-disadvantaged 
backgrounds. As part of Strategic Goal 1,  
we will broaden our approach to include  
other areas of educational disadvantage, e.g. mature, second-chance, and lifelong learners.

20   Strategic GoalsSTRATEGIC GOAL 1
Specific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
1.1 Curriculum Reform Conduct a systematic review of the 
curriculum  and learning design of our 
degree programmes with a focus on the 
learning experience  of the individual 
student and their ability to flourish in the 
world outside the university. Proposals 
include the introduction of (optional) 
modules (e.g. Philosophy/Ethics, Design, Coding, Sustainability), further digital 
learning enhancements (TEL), greater 
flexibility in programme delivery, international experience, and experiential 
learning initiatives.The number of programmes reviewed
Specific digital learning initiatives
Modules (blended) developed, and 
measures of student engagement
1.2 Teaching Quality Establish a Professional Development 
Framework for Teaching and Learning in 
order to enable us to assure the quality  
of our teaching , and develop a DCU-
accredited award, e.g. Master’s in Learning Innovation for HE.Completion of Framework
Accreditation of Award
Percentage take-up by staff
1.3 Skills and  
Employability  Review our approaches to optimise the 
employability  of our graduates , including 
an enhancement of work-based learning 
(INTRA), an expansion of our Graduate 
Attributes initiative, and a focus on ensuring the relevance of our degree 
programmes. We will also infuse 
appropriate levels of technology awareness (AI; Data Analytics etc.)  
across all degree programmes. The overall objective is to ensure that our graduates are equipped with the appropriate skills, 
across all dimensions, to flourish as the 
nature of employment evolves.Completion of INTRA Review
Implementation of new INTRA proposals
Expansion of Graduate Attributes
Employability data
Percentage integration of technology 
into degree programmes
1.4 Educational Opportunity  Broaden our focus on educational opportunity  to include mature, second-
chance, and lifelong learners. We will work 
with FE providers to develop entry routes 
(including foundation and advanced entry) to DCU programmes that would 
target these groups. We will also revamp 
our Access programme.Development of new entry routes
The number of students in target groups
Revamped Access programme

21 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Specific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
1.5 Student Support  Establish an enhanced Student 
Transitions Programme that addresses the full cycle of the student journey from 
application stage to graduation and 
beyond (alumni stage). There will be  
a particular focus on an enhanced 
orientation experience, improved 
retention supports, and a positive engagement with university administration. 
We will introduce a new Student 
Information System (SIS) that will enhance student engagement with University 
processes and enable greater flexibility  
in programme delivery.The number of Faculties implementing 
school-based orientation
Development of an online First Year 
Transitions module
Percentage improvement in retention 
rates
Introduction of SIS
1.6 Participation and 
EngagementIntroduce a new DCU Extra-curricular Engagement Award  that will recognise 
participative learning ‘outside the 
classroom’. This Award, which will avail  
of digital credentialing on the student 
Learning Portfolio (Reflect), will nurture 
attributes of civic engagement, global 
citizenship, enterprise, empathy,  
and leadership, and will stimulate 
engagement with the Student  
Leadership and Life-skills Centre.Development and take-up of 
Engagement Award
Development of digital credentialing
Percentage use of learning portfolio as a 
platform to capture engagement
Increased awareness of Graduate 
Attributes amongst students and 
employers (Survey)
1.7 Health and Wellbeing Enhance Student Wellbeing  by 
introducing a new Healthy Campus 
initiative (‘DCU Healthy’) and a new ‘Sport for All’ Strategy, which will both support 
the physical and mental welfare of students. 
We will also take steps to ensure a vibrant social experience for our students across 
all our academic campuses.Launch of ‘DCU Healthy’ initiative
Launch of ‘Sport for All’ Strategy
Achievement of ‘Health Promoting 
University’ and Healthy Workplace 
accreditation
Research-based outcomes of positive 
behaviour change
Student wellbeing data
Percentage increase in use of sports  
and leisure facilities
We will introduce an enhanced 
student support system that 
will extend all the way to the 
alumni stage.

22   Strategic Goals
Advance our 
reputation for world-class researchSTRATEGIC GOAL2
23 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022Such is the nature and complexity 
of the major research challenges facing the world that international collaboration is essential in  
order to make significant  
and sustained advances.  
A core element of DCU’s Vision is to be a 
globally-significant university that is renowned 
for its discovery and translation of knowledge 
to advance society. This commitment toworld-class research is central to Strategic  
Goal 2 where we set out a range of Specific Actions to advance our reputation in that regard. In the first instance, we will foster  
a research culture across all levels of the University and will empower our staff and students to reach their full potential in research.
We recognise that, in general, the greatest 
impact is achieved from a critical mass of
multidisciplinary researchers tackling an 
important research question. With that in mind, we will conduct an externally-mediated 
research prioritisation exercise in order to 
identify our priorities. This approach needs  
to be underpinned by a recruitment and 
retention plan that is aligned with those 
priorities. More generally, we will seek to strengthen significantly our human capital  
at all levels of research through a range of initiatives and we will place a particular emphasis on fostering research leadership.  
We will also renew our efforts to showcase  
our research achievements and distinctiveness, both nationally and internationally.Such is the nature and complexity of the major research challenges facing the world that 
international collaboration is essential in order 
to make significant and sustained advances.We will promote and support international 
research collaboration while also taking 
particular account of geo-political developments. Scientific excellence cannot  
be achieved without state of the art research infrastructure and facilities. We will develop  
a road map to sustain and improve our 
research infrastructure and to plan for future 
technological needs.

24   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
2.1 Research Priorities Conduct a robust Research Prioritisation 
Process  to identify our research priorities 
in order to optimise internal supports, 
enhance our participation in national and 
international research programmes,  
and advance our research impact.  
Taking inputs from key internal stakeholders and external expertise,  
the emphasis will be on multidisciplinary 
research and distinctive capabilities.Completion of Research Prioritisation 
Process
Development of internal support 
strategy
Tracking of research metrics and funding 
successes in priority areas
2.2 Human Capital Develop a Human Capital Plan for Research  to underpin our research goals. 
Developed in partnership with our HR unit, 
the plan will establish an integrated, 
strategic approach whereby recruitment 
and retention of staff at all levels will be aligned with our research priorities.
The plan will also identify initiatives  
to attract and support emerging  
research leaders.Completion and internal dissemination 
of plan
Annual review of strategic alignment in 
appointments across faculties
Specific successes (e.g. Science 
Foundation Ireland [SFI] Research 
Professorship Programme)
2.3 Quality and Impact Establish a Research Impact Initiative  
with a focus on enhancing the University’s research metrics and impact across all five faculties. This initiative (and associated 
annual awards) will recognise the 
performance of individual researchers  
and Schools in advancing their research 
performance, both in terms of key metrics 
prioritised by the university (citation impact; funding; PhD numbers etc.) and 
direct translational impact on society.Launch of Research Impact Initiative
Implementation of research metrics and 
impact guidelines at faculty level
Annual awards for research 
performance and translational impact
2.4 International 
Collaboration  Support prioritised opportunities for International Research Collaboration . 
This support will be channelled through  
a new Strategic Partnerships Office  to 
be established as another initiative of  
this Strategic Plan. Priority will be given to 
deep, established partnerships (e.g. with 
ASU; UU) as well as new partnerships will clear evidence of significant potential.  
The impact of Brexit will be taken into account in ongoing prioritisation.The number of publications with international partners
The number and scale of funding awards 
with international partners
Engagement indicators (including student 
and staff mobility) with such partners
STRATEGIC GOAL 2
25 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Specific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
2.5 Leadership 
Development  Foster the development of new Research Leaders. Operating at many levels, this initiative will include identification of 
leadership for multidisciplinary research 
initiatives to spearhead specific research efforts and the introduction of a ‘New 
Blood’ Research Fellow/Lecturer Initiative.Implementation of ‘New Blood’ Research 
Fellow/Lecturer Initiative
Introduction of Leadership identification 
and support scheme
The number of proposals led by DCU 
Principal Investigators
2.6 External Profile Promote our research activity to our external stakeholders to raise the profile 
of DCU research in the media and among the general public.Percentage increase in the number of DCU research stories mentioned on  
digital platforms
Percentage increase in the number of 
DCU research references in national  
and international media
We recognise that, in general, 
the greatest impact is 
achieved from a critical 
mass of multidisciplinary 
researchers tackling an 
important research question. 

26   Strategic Goals
Sustain our 
ambitions through income generationSTRATEGIC GOAL3
27 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
We will develop a non-exchequer 
Income Generation Plan in collaboration with Faculties and  
Units of the University as well as the DCU Commercial Group of companies.  
DCU is an ambitious university that aspires  
to excellence across all dimensions of its core 
activities. Realisation of our ambitions demands 
resources at levels that have not been provided from exchequer sources for most of the past 
decade. Although these deficits have been 
identified clearly as a major sectoral problem  
in the Cassells Report (Investing in National 
Ambition: A Strategy for Funding Higher 
Education), and although its significant recommendations to remedy that problem are 
still under consideration by Government, it is 
not yet clear what actions might be taken and on what time-scale. With this in mind, Strategic 
Goal 3 sets out to address, albeit partially in 
the first instance, the gap between exchequer funding and the resources required to support 
our ambitions to advance the University 
towards consistent excellence.
The starting point is a Specific Action to 
establish a comprehensive Income Generation Plan that will leverage the potential of a broad 
range of activities in which DCU is engaged.  
It is clear that many of these activities may 
need to be up-scaled and/or refined, but the 
plan may also point to some new activities. 
Successful implementation of the plan will require coordination by a new Business 
Development Unit that will engage with key 
individuals in Faculties and Units across the University. Such engagement will need to be incentivised at Faculty/Unit level so that additional, successful activity will lead to 
beneficial developments at local level. By 
conducting an Income and Cost Base Review, we will also ensure that the real value and cost 
of our ongoing activities is understood and can 
be acted upon.
Apart from income generation through 
business development activities, we will redouble our efforts on attracting support 
from philanthropic sources, especially through 
increased engagement and ongoing alignment of objectives with DCU Educational Trust.

28   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
3.1 Income  
Generation PlanDevelop a non-exchequer Income 
Generation Plan  in collaboration with 
Faculties and Units of the University as 
well as the DCU Commercial Group of 
companies. The Plan will leverage opportunities arising from a broad range 
of areas including our student profile 
(including international students), transnational education provision,  
online education, CPD and upskilling,  
and consultancy.Completion of plan
Identification and implementation of 
new income-generation initiatives
Annual growth in non-exchequer income
Faculty and Unit engagement
3.2 Business  
Development UnitEstablish a Business Development Team  
that will support the pursuit of income 
generation opportunities developed 
across the University (Faculties, Units, 
DCU Commercial). This team will also coordinate an annual competition 
soliciting income generation ideas  
from the university community.Business Development Team in place
The number of income generation 
opportunities identified and pursued
Degree of collaboration across the 
University
Roll-out of Income Generation Ideas 
competition
3.3 Incentivisation Model  Develop an Incentivisation Model  for 
allocation of both exchequer and non-exchequer funds. The new model will incentivise Faculties/Units to develop  
net revenue-generating initiatives by rewarding the instigating entity or department, while at the same time 
supporting the advancement of the 
University and providing seed funding  
for further activity.New Incentivisation Model developed and implemented
The number of Faculties/Units proposing 
initiatives
Annual growth in income linked to model
3.4 Philanthropic Focus Enhance our focus on Philanthropy  
through increased engagement of the 
DCU community with DCU Educational Trust (DCUET) and a review of the 
Campaign for Dublin City University 
(‘Shaping the Future’) to ensure alignment with this Strategic Plan.Re-prioritisation of DCUET fundraising campaign
Philanthropic income linked to priorities 
(e.g. Human Capital) of this Strategic Plan
3.5 Income and Cost Review Carry out an Income and Cost Base Review  of the University’s operations and 
activities. This critical review will focus on understanding the real value and costs of all our activities, establishing continuation 
criteria for such activities, and identifying 
efficiencies, savings and opportunities.Progress of the review of Income and Cost Base
Identification and implementation of 
efficiencies
Establishment of continuation criteria 
for specific activities
STRATEGIC GOAL 3
29 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
DCU is an ambitious 
university that aspires  
to excellence across all dimensions of its core 
activities. Realisation  
of our ambitions demands 
resources at levels that 
have not been provided 
from exchequer sources for most of the past decade.
30   Strategic Goals
Ensure a 
coherent, connected universitySTRATEGIC GOAL4
31 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Central to this goal is the creation of 
a coherent, integrated, multi-campus University, ‘One DCU.’  
In terms of scale, geographic footprint, and 
disciplinary profile, DCU is very different to the 
university that existed at the beginning of our 
last Strategic Plan (Transforming Lives and Societies: 2012-2017) . Our new ‘identity’ 
presents us with new opportunities and challenges. Strategic Goal 4 focuses on enhancing the quality and effectiveness  
of our operations, and interactions with students and staff, in this new context.  
Central to this goal is the creation of a 
coherent, integrated, multi-campus  
University, ‘One DCU’.
In order to accommodate further, planned 
change over the next decade, we will develop  
a new multi-campus masterplan that focuses 
on the provision of the requisite educational 
and administrative infrastructure. This plan  
will be informed by a strategic analysis and 
associated decisions concerning the desired 
profile (undergraduate, postgraduate, international, trans-national, part-time etc.)  
of the student body and its rate of growth over the coming years. Provision of appropriate levels of student accommodation will be a key 
element of the masterplan. We will also initiate 
a new refurbishment plan to ensure upkeep of existing infrastructure. Transport to and from 
our various campuses will be an important 
factor in our planning and we will also pilot  
a new inter-campus transport scheme to 
facilitate easy movement of students and staff.We will continue to invest in the digital 
infrastructure supporting campus activities, 
especially in the areas of teaching and learning, 
research, and administration. The next phase of development, however, will focus on the 
integration of systems that will enhance the 
operational effectiveness of the University  
and the quality of process interactions with 
both students and staff. This approach will 
leverage the affordances of digital technology to enhance the ‘student journey’ and the ‘staff 
experience’ in a roll-out of our Digital Campus
vision. Our digitally-connected University  
will provide us with comprehensive data on 
university activity and, therefore, and evidence 
basis for Strategic Planning and decision-making. We will establish a new Unit (Strategic 
Intelligence and Operational Excellence)  
to coordinate activity based on these  
new opportunities.

32   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
4.1 Multi-campus 
MasterplanCreate a new 10-year multi-campus Masterplan , informed by a faculty and 
student growth model (see below), to 
provide infrastructure to accommodate 
our future ambitions.
The plan will include a substantial  
increase in on-campus or near-campus 
accommodation and will prioritise  
co-location of staff in each faculty.Completion of new Masterplan
Identification of phased capital funding 
needs to deliver on plan
Percentage increase in provision of 
student accommodation
4.2 Student Profile and 
Growth PlanDevelop a comprehensive Student Profile 
and Growth Plan that takes account of 
our mission, vision and values, demographic and international HE trends, and the 
financial sustainability of the university 
(Strategic Goal 3).Consultation and solicitation of inputs for plan
Completion of plan
Development of Faculty-specific Growth 
and Profile plans
Implementation of associated Faculty 
recruitment strategies
4.3 Digital Campus  Implement our Digital Campus Vision   
to establish an integrated, digitally-connected university through an advanced network of connected 
infrastructure, digital platforms  
and people.Completion and dissemination of Digital 
Campus Vision
Roll-out of required digital infrastructure
Launch of new Student Management 
System
4.4 Strategic Intelligence  
and Operational ExcellenceEstablish a Strategic Intelligence (SI)  
and Operational Excellence (OE) Unit  
to leverage the affordances of the Digital 
Campus, provide an evidence basis for strategic decision-making, and to optimise 
staff time through reduced bureaucracy.  
This unit will also place a particular 
emphasis on the student experience 
(‘student journey’).Establishment of SI and OE Unit
Development of a plan for prioritised 
actions of the Unit
Implementation of Operational 
Excellence review of university procedures
Development of DCU Dashboard to 
provide data analytics for decision-making
4.5 Refurbishment Programme  Initiate a rolling Refurbishment Programme  to ensure that our student 
and staff facilities are continuously 
upgraded and remain fit for purpose.Dissemination of rolling Refurbishment 
Programme
Annual evidence of impact of programme
4.6 Transport Develop and implement a  University 
Transport Strategy , including a pilot of  
an Inter-campus shuttle bus.Completion and dissemination of 
Transport Strategy
Percentage increase in bus routes and 
frequency
STRATEGIC GOAL 4
33 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
The next phase of 
development will focus  
on the integration of systems that will 
enhance the operational 
effectiveness of the University and the quality 
of process interactions 
with both students  
and staff. 
34   Strategic Goals
Value  
and develop 
our staff communitySTRATEGIC GOAL5
35 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Recognising the considerable increase 
in our scale and complexity of operations across multiple campuses, the issues of recruitment, retention, and succession planning assume even greater importance.  
As in any organisation, the achievements  
and advancement of that organisation are 
dependent significantly on the quality and 
commitment of its employees. The upward trajectory of DCU over the past decade has 
built upon an engaged community of staff  
who shared, and believed in, the mission of  
the institution and contributed accordingly. Moreover, since its establishment, DCU has 
possessed a sense of community with a culture of respect and mutual support. Now, with  
a significantly changed scale, footprint,  
and staff profile, we recognise that we should focus closely on our staff cohort and on building 
a new community as we enter the next exciting 
phase of development for the University. Strategic Goal 5 is explicit about valuing and 
developing our human resource, the people 
who make DCU what it is.
As a starting point, the focus is on identity  
and the lived experience of staff as we seek to 
establish and develop a new staff community 
and shared culture (‘One DCU’). This will entail 
considerable consultation, listening, and social engagement experiences. Building on the 
theme of Talent in this Strategic Plan, we will 
expand our staff development activities, with  
a particular emphasis on leadership.Recognising the considerable increase in our scale and complexity of operations across 
multiple campuses, the issues of recruitment, 
retention, and succession planning assume even greater importance. With that in mind,  
we will develop and implement a comprehensive Human Capital Plan. We will also establish a new Awards Scheme to recognise the 
outstanding contributions of our staff, 
especially in those areas that are not typically highlighted in a university environment.
The health and wellbeing of our staff are of 
critical importance and we expect that the 
rollout of our new Healthy Campus initiative 
(‘DCU Healthy’) will have a significant impact  
in that regard. We will also expand our 
commitment to Diversity and Inclusion. In 
particular, we will build upon our Women in Leadership suite of initiatives and introduce 
new elements that reflect our commitment to 
gender equality.

36   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
5.1 Culture and 
CommunityFoster the development of a Staff Community  (‘One DCU’) focusing on 
culture, identity and the lived experience. 
Following comprehensive consultation,  
we will develop a Staff Community 
Implementation Plan that will take 
particular account of our new multi-
campus, post-incorporation situation. Broadening of communication channels 
with staff (e.g. DCU Fuse platform) and 
the creation of more cross-campus social spaces and events will be a particular focus.Launch of ‘One DCU’ Implementation Plan
Introduction of new communication 
channels and modalities for staff
Creation of cross-campus social 
engagements
Staff survey(s)
5.2 Talent Development Increase the emphasis on Staff Talent 
Development  through the expansion of 
our Coaching and Mentoring Programme and extending access to our Leadership and Management Programme.Expansion of Coaching and Mentoring Programme
Rebrand and extension of Leadership 
and Management Programme
The number of and diversity of staff 
availing of Programmes
Introduction of ‘Buddy System’ for  
new staff
5.3 Human Capital Plan  Develop a comprehensive Human Capital 
Plan  focusing on strategic recruitment, 
retention processes, and succession 
planning. The Plan will adopt a ‘rolling’ 
approach with a detailed annual review used to identify priority needs.Completion and dissemination of plan
Review of University recruitment 
processes (including advertising)
Identification of staff progression and 
support processes
Annual review data
5.4 Awards Scheme Recognise the contribution of staff 
through the introduction of an Annual 
Staff Awards Scheme .Launch of Award Scheme
The number of submissions
5.5 Health and Wellbeing  Enhance Staff Health and Wellbeing  
through the introduction of the Healthy 
Campus Initiative (‘DCU Healthy’) and 
related supports.Roll-out of ‘DCU Healthy’
Percentage engagement of staff with 
‘DCU Healthy’
Achievement of ‘Healthy Workplace’ 
accreditation
Work-life balance initiatives
5.6 Diversity and Inclusion Promote  Diversity and Inclusion  across 
the University through initiatives such as 
DCU Women in Leadership.Extension of DCU Women in Leadership initiatives
Athena SWAN and similar successes
DCU Gender Equality data
Introduction of other Diversity and 
Inclusion  initiatives
Percentage engagement of staff
STRATEGIC GOAL 5
37 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
As a starting point,  
the focus is on identity  
and the lived experience  
of staff as we seek to 
establish and develop a 
new staff community and 
shared culture (‘One DCU’).
38   Strategic Goals
Develop 
a global universitySTRATEGIC GOAL6
39 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
As part of our commitment to 
developing talented graduates that can flourish worldwide, we will introduce new opportunities for students to have a global experience during their undergraduate degree.
Given DCU’s aspiration to global significance 
as articulated in our Vision statement and also 
our commitment to developing graduates that 
can flourish as global citizens, the International dimension of our Strategic Plan is of critical 
importance. That level of significance is 
reflected in our plan to develop an integrated, university-wide Internationalisation Plan that 
has strong roots in each faculty. This plan will 
target key regions in Europe, North America, Asia and the Middle East but will be sufficiently 
flexible to respond to new opportunities as 
appropriate. We will also expand our global footprint by replicating our Trans-National 
Education model, which has been developed 
and implemented successfully in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and in other locations.
As part of our commitment to developing 
talented graduates that can flourish worldwide, 
we will introduce new opportunities for students 
to have a global experience during their undergraduate degree. In addition, we will 
integrate international dimensions as widely  
as possible into our curricula. The new Student 
Centre (due to open in March 2018 on the 
Glasnevin Campus) will further contribute to 
the global agenda, as a core element of the Centre will be a Global Village that celebrates 
multi-cultural and multi-ethnic diversity.International research partnerships, and the 
associated mobility of student and staff,  
play a key role in the global engagement of universities. As highlighted in Strategic Goal 2, we will support this activity by creating a 
formal link between our International Office 
and the new Strategic Partnerships Office. Both existing and new partnerships will be 
supported and we will place a particular 
emphasis opportunities created by Brexit.

40   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
6.1 Internationalisation 
PlanEstablish an integrated, Pan-University Internationalisation Plan  that will be 
faculty-based and will set ambitious 
targets framed around three pillars: 
Mobility, Partnership and Recruitment. Activities will be focussed primarily on the 
following key territories: USA, China, 
India, Europe and the Gulf region (while simultaneously tracking opportunities  
in other emerging regions).Completion and dissemination of plan
Percentage activity under each pillar at 
faculty and university level
Regional Strategy Groups established
Annual performance and income versus 
targets
6.2 Trans-National 
EducationPrioritise and replicate our  
Trans-National Education (TNE)  model, 
focusing on a small number of suitable 
partners and with involvement of all  
five Faculties.The number of international locations
The number of Faculties involved
The number of TNE students registeredPercentage performance and income  
versus targets
6.3 Global Experience  
and Citizenship Establish a Global Experience and Global 
Citizenship Plan for students. There will be 
a specific focus on (i) maximising the 
number of students experiencing a significant global engagement, and (ii) 
integrating international elements into 
the formal curriculum. More generally,  
we will develop a DCU Language Plan  
to support our community in developing conversational ability and cultural appreciation for selected European  
and Asian countries.Percentage programmes incorporating international experience (project; 
INTRA; period abroad)
Percentage programmes with 
international curricular element
Percentage students exposed to 
international experience and/or 
curricular element
Development of the DCU Language Plan
6.4 Global Village  Create an On-campus Global Village . 
The Global Village, which will have 
physical and virtual dimensions and will celebrate global diversity, will have its hub 
in the new Student Centre but will have 
nodes on all our campuses.Launch of Global Village Plan
The number of events and the number  
of students engagedThe number of engagements with 
international locations
6.5 Strategic Partnerships 
Office Establish a strong functional link between our International Office and new 
Strategic Partnerships Office (SPO)  
(Strategic Goal 2). The International 
Office will support the development of 
new partnerships and the deepening of 
existing partnerships (with a particular focus on the post-Brexit situation). Formalisation of link between International Office and SPO
The number of projects supported
The number of new partnerships
STRATEGIC GOAL 6
41 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
A core element of the 
new Student Centre * will 
be a Global Village that 
celebrates multi-cultural 
and multi-ethnic diversity.
* Due to open in March 2018 on the Glasnevin Campus.
42   Strategic Goals
Nurture 
creativity and culture across the universitySTRATEGIC GOAL7
43 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
We will promote the exploration 
of possibilities arising at the intersections of the creative arts  
and technological innovation.
DCU has a well-established reputation for 
innovation. This has been based primarily on
our effective translation of research outcomes 
in the science and technology areas into commercial benefit (as evidenced by strong 
technology transfer metrics, for example) 
together with the behaviour of the institution itself in responding to national and global 
challenges and opportunities. The recent 
expansion of DCU, however, has created  
new possibilities for us across all disciplines.
In particular, the university has broadened  
and deepened its profile in the creative and 
performing arts. Strategic Goal 7 reflects not 
only the changed dimensions and possibilities 
of the University but also a new dynamic in the role of culture and creativity in society, both 
nationally and globally.
We will foster a broader culture of creativity 
and innovation in DCU, beginning with the 
narrative used to describe the university and its priorities, both inside and outside the university. 
We will promote the exploration of possibilities 
arising at the intersections of the creative arts and technological innovation. We will develop 
an Innovation Plan that leverages the wide-
ranging assets available to the University in  
this context, e.g. DCU Ryan Academy for 
Entrepreneurs (DCURAE), DCU Business 
School (DCUBS), DCU Invent, DCU Alpha  
and others. We will aim to develop a pioneering Maker Space on the DCU Alpha campus.  
We will also engage with external partners to 
develop a significant initiative in the area of 
social innovation and social entrepreneurship.
The Student Innovation Hub in the new  
Student Centre (opening in March 2018  
on the Glasnevin Campus) will stimulate  
a broad range activities and opportunities  
for students in the areas of innovation and 
entrepreneurship. Student engagement in 
these activities is expected to increase 
significantly as a consequence.
We will develop a new Arts and Culture strategy, 
the implementation of which will lead not only to an active programme of cultural activities 
for students and staff inside the university  
but also a significant engagement with the 
communities in our neighbourhoods around  
the University. In this latter context, we will  
seek to establish a DCU Cultural Quarter.
We will establish an Institute of Creativity  
that will focus on scholarship, education and 
outreach in the area of creativity and this 
Institute will also engage actively with the 
Creative Ireland initiative. Our new Irish Language Strategy (Straitéis na Gaeilge)
will represent a step-change in our commitment 
to the promotion and teaching of the Irish language. This will be augmented by a broader 
Language Plan for the University.

44   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
7.1 Creativity and 
InnovationFoster a culture of creativity and innovation  in the University. Much of  
the culture will derive from other  
Specific Actions associated with this Strategic Goal but it will also require  
clear articulation in high-level 
communications from the University  
along with reinforcement through  
events and awards.Inclusion of creativity and innovation in 
high-level messaging
Attraction of sponsor for President’s 
Award for Innovation
Developing relationships with key 
external thought leaders in creativity  
and innovation
Appointment of Adjunct Professors in 
creativity and innovation, respectively
7. 2 Innovation Plan Develop and implement a DCU 
Innovation Plan . The plan will include an 
integrated approach to innovation across 
the University through coordination of the 
activities and strengths of DCU Ryan 
Academy for Entrepreneurs (DCURAE), DCU Alpha, DCU Business School 
(DCUBS), DCU Invent and other units  
with capability in this area.Completion and dissemination of 
Innovation Plan
Programme of activities across 
DCURAE, DCU Alpha, DCUBS, DCU 
Invent etc.
Provision of optional module(s) for 
students in area of innovation and 
entrepreneurship and percentage  
take-up
Development of a Maker Space in  
DCU AlphaSocial Innovation initiative
7.3 Student  
Innovation Hub   Leverage the Student Innovation Hub  in 
the new Student Centre.The number of activitiesThe number of students engaged
The number of national and 
international competitions participated 
in and successes
The number of international innovation 
engagements
7.4 Cultural Experience Promote the cultural experience of students and staff . This will entail the 
creation of an Arts and Culture Strategy 
together with a structure to support an 
active programme of performing and creative arts across the three DCU 
campuses. It will also involve the 
exploration of a Cultural Quarter engaging with communities in the 
neighbourhoods of our campuses.The number of events; attendance
Engagement with partners to develop 
Cultural Quarter
Creation of an Arts and Culture Strategy
Attraction of artists in residence
Inclusion of cultural dimension in 
engagement strategy (Strategic Goal 9)
STRATEGIC GOAL 7
45 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Specific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
7. 5 Institute of Creativity Establish a DCU Institute of Creativity . 
This multidisciplinary institute will draw 
upon the expertise of staff across various 
faculties as well as external thought 
leaders and will focus on scholarship, outreach, and education in the area of 
creativity. The Institute’s programme of 
activities will also include engagement with the Creative Ireland initiative.Scale of staff involvement
Research outputs
The number of events and outreach 
activities
Provision of creativity module
Engagement with Creative Ireland
7.6 An Ghaeilge  
Irish LanguageDevelop and implement an Irish  
Language Strategy (Straitéis na Gaeilge).  
The Strategy will include both internal 
goals and a vision for DCU’s national and 
regional contribution to the promotion of the Irish language.  
A core objective is the creation of a new Centre, tentatively called Lár-ionad 
Teagasc agus Foghlaim na Gaeilge (LTFG), 
with a strong focus on research on language acquisition and the teaching, 
learning and promotion of Irish. Launch of the Irish Language Strategy
The number of events promoting 
Gaeilge across all campuses; the number of participants
Creation of new Centre (LTFG)
New programmes for both Initial Teacher 
Education and CPD to strengthen 
teaching and learning of Gaeilge
Improvement metrics
The recent expansion of DCU 
has created new possibilities 
for us across all disciplines.  
In particular, the University has broadened and deepened 
its profile in the creative and performing arts.

46   Strategic Goals
Place 
sustainability  
at the core  
of the  
universitySTRATEGIC GOAL8
47 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
It reflects not only our commitment 
to play our part as a responsible organisation but also our realisation of the messages we can convey as an exemplar organisation to both our students and society around us.  
The UN’s Brundtland Commission Report 
(1987) concluded that humanity has the ability 
to make development sustainable if it satisfies 
the “needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their 
own needs.” This extension of the concept of 
sustainability beyond environmental protection to include human wellbeing was  
an important step forward and was further reflected in the more recent UN Sustainable Development Goals. This broad definition of 
Sustainable Development underpins DCU’s 
own commitment to Sustainability as highlighted in this Strategic Goal. The inclusion 
of this Goal as one of nine priorities in our 
Strategic Plan is an important statement by the University and it emphasises the critical 
importance of this topic for global society. 
Moreover, it reflects not only our commitment to play our part as a responsible organisation 
but also our realisation of the messages we can 
convey as an exemplar organisation to both our students and society around us.
At the core of this Strategic Goal will be  
the development and implementation of  
a DCU Sustainability Plan created by a cross-
institutional Sustainability Council. This council will also play a key role in monitoring the 
implementation of the plan.From the narrower environmental perspective 
of sustainability, we will seek to embed best 
practice across the broad range of DCU  
multi-campus operations. We will also establish 
ecological footprint metrics and set ambitious 
targets to reduce these. As an extension of this 
objective, we will identify one of our campuses and seek to develop it as a carbon-neutral 
exemplar campus.
Sustainability will play a key role in our academic 
and research activities. With a view to enhancing 
the insight and commitment of our students, we will integrate principles of sustainability and 
sustainability literacy into our undergraduate 
curricula. Specific degree programme(s) will  
be developed at postgraduate level. We will 
also promote research focusing on sustainability.
Such activity is likely to build on existing strengths and existing international collaborations.

48   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
8.1 Sustainability Plan Create a DCU Sustainability Plan that will 
be a road map for operating a healthier and more sustainable University, including 
responsible management, for students, 
staff, and the local community.
A cross-institutional Sustainability Council 
will be established to support the creation of the plan and to monitor its 
implementation.Establishment of Sustainability Council
Completion and dissemination of 
Sustainability Plan
Roll-out of implementation plan
Annual reports on achievement of  
goals set
8.2 Sustainable  
Operations  Embed Sustainability as a key driver in 
DCU operations including building 
management, energy, water, CO2 
emissions, transportation, operational 
resilience, public realm spaces and in the 
construction of new buildings. The new challenges facing DCU in operating a 
decentralised campus will have to be 
taken into account here.Achievement of ISO 50001 certification for energy and water
Retention of An Taisce/FEE Green 
Campus Flag
Levels of sustainable commuting to, 
from and between campuses
Implementation of NZEB standard for  
all future buildings
8.3 Curricular Integration  Integrate Sustainability Principles, 
Literacy and Awareness  into the student 
curriculum. This will involve working closely 
with Faculties and the Education 
Committee to establish the optimal approaches to achieving this objective. 
There will be a particular emphasis on 
awareness of the UN Sustainable Development Goals.The number of degree programmes with Sustainability components integrated
The number of students participating in 
such degree programmes
Creation of optional (online) 
sustainability module
Develop of a Sustainability Engagement 
digital credential
8.4 Ecological Footprint  Establish Ecological Footprint Metrics  for 
the University and set ambitious targets to reduce these. Establishment of Footprint Metrics for 
each campus/ faculty/unit
Annual reports on targets achieved
Measures of student engagement and 
behavioural change
8.5 Research Focus  Promote and support Sustainability 
Research across the University. This will 
include, for example, our involvement in the Global Consortium for Sustainability Outcomes (GCSO) and the ongoing work 
of the DCU Water Institute.Identification of optimal campus and 
required implementation plan
Percentage progress to carbon-neutral 
status for exemplar campus
8.6 Carbon-Neutral 
Campus  Develop a DCU campus as an exemplar Carbon-Neutral Campus . Identification of optimal campus and 
required implementation plan
Percentage progress to carbon-neutral 
status for exemplar campus
STRATEGIC GOAL 8
49 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Sustainability will 
play a key role in our 
academic and research 
activities. With a view 
to enhancing the insight 
and commitment of our students, we will integrate 
principles of sustainability 
and sustainability literacy into our undergraduate 
curricula. 
50   Strategic Goals
Pursue active  
engagement  
with our 
communitiesSTRATEGIC GOAL9
51 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
We are, and always have been,  
a highly engaged university,  
the very antithesis of the ‘Ivory  
Tower University.’
From its establishment, DCU has been 
committed to active engagement with its 
various communities. These include the 
University’s own community (students, staff, retirees, alumni, and supporters), our local and 
regional communities, the enterprise sector, 
and a range of global partners. We are, and always have been, a highly engaged university,
the very antithesis of the ‘Ivory Tower 
University’. It is one of the distinctive features  
of DCU. In this Strategic Plan, we extend that 
commitment and associated behaviour even 
further, with a deepening of engagement across all the sectors highlighted above.
We will develop a 4x4 Engagement Strategy 
reflecting the combination of the Quadruple 
Helix (Enterprise, Government, Citizens, 
Academia) model of engagement with four  
of our primary communities (Local, Regional, 
National, Global). We will also establish an 
Engagement Forum to act as an interface point for external partners. Through a range of 
initiatives (including formal credentialing  
and curricular recognition), we will foster 
student engagement and volunteering.
Reflecting our expanded footprint locally,  
we will pursue the development of a Northside 
University Quarter with an associated 
commitment to add value locally in partnership with community stakeholders. Our focus on 
widening educational participation will continue through a range of new initiatives,  
the most significant being the establishment  
of an Adult Learning Centre.
One of the many advantages of our location is 
the vibrant region to the south of DCU (Dublin City) and the dynamic region to the north of 
the University (Fingal; M1 Corridor; Belfast). 
Consequently, regional engagement offers many opportunities to us and we will pursue 
with our partners across a range of topics,  
with a special focus on commercial and social 
innovation. Cross-border engagement will be  
a particular priority, especially with our Strategic Partner, Ulster University.
We will continue to address global grand 
challenges (e.g. ageing; natural resources)  
with global partners (especially via the 
Transatlantic Higher Education Partnership 
with Arizona State University). A new development will be a broadening of our 
commitment to inclusion via the establishment 
of the world’s first Autism-friendly University. 
As Ireland’s University of Enterprise, we will 
deepen our engagement with enterprise partners under the guidance of a new 
Enterprise Engagement Plan. A particular 
focus will be on leveraging the assets of our Innovation Campus, DCU Alpha. We will also 
strengthen our engagement with our Alumni 
community via a range of initiatives.

52   Strategic GoalsSpecific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
9.1 Engagement  
StrategyDevelop a 4x4 Engagement Strategy  
framed on the Quadruple Helix 
(Enterprise, Government, Citizens, 
Academia) model of engagement with  
our four primary communities (Local, 
Regional, National, Global). Actions in  
this constituent strategy will include the establishment of a University Engagement Forum that will act as a contact point for 
external engagement and that will 
stimulate and support staff engagement.Completion and dissemination Engagement Forum
Scale of participation in staff 
engagement initiatives
9.2 Student  
EngagementFoster and recognise Student Engagement . This will entail a multi-
faceted approach (integration of external 
engagement into curricula via optional or 
required modules; assessed service learning; introduction of the DCU  
Extra-curricular Engagement Award  
(as in Strategic Goal 1); encouragement  
of student volunteering via student 
volunteer.ie).The number of modules with 
engagement elements
Percentage students who gain credits  
or credentialsThe number and percentage growth of 
students volunteering
9.3 Local  
CommunitiesBuild on our Engagement with Local Communities  to reflect both our 
expanded footprint and some additional priorities. In particular, we will develop the concept of a Northside University Quarter 
that brings social, cultural and economic 
value to our neighbouring communities. We will extend our commitment to 
widening participation and educational 
pathways through the establishment of  
an Adult Learning Centre and an Annual 
Educational Festival. We will also engage 
with Local Area Partnerships in this context. Our commitment to inclusive 
education will also be reflected in our 
ongoing development of the Centre for Talented Youth (CTYI).Development of Plan for Northside University Quarter
Roll-out of specific initiatives under plan  
(e.g. Cultural Hub)Establishment of Adult Learning Centre
Organisation of Annual Educational 
Festival
9.4 Regional Focus Champion social, cultural, and economic 
growth in our region . This region includes 
Dublin City, Fingal, and the Eastern Corridor from Dublin to Belfast. To make 
the desired impact, we will build upon 
deep partnerships (existing and new) with local authorities, County Councils, and 
major organisations and institutions (e.g. 
Dundalk IT) in our region. We will place particular emphasis on strengthening 
cross-border engagement, especially with 
our strategic partner, Ulster University.The number of partnerships established
Impact measures of initiatives in 
partnership plans; annual reports
KPIs of cross-border projects (e.g. 
research outputs)
Cross-border mobility of staff  
and students
STRATEGIC GOAL 9
53 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Specific Actions:  
Over the next five years we will:Indicators of success/progress
9.5 Global Issues Engage with global issues and global 
partners . We will continue to address the 
challenges and opportunities of an ageing 
demographic (by leveraging our growing 
global network of Age-Friendly Universities – AFU) and tackle the issue of water supply 
for all (through DCU Water Institute and 
the Global Consortium of Sustainable Outcomes). We will pioneer the 
development of an Autism-Friendly 
University. We will develop opportunities for students to engage with global issues 
through our major university partnerships 
(e.g. ASU). We will continue our commitment to University of Sanctuary initiatives.Expansion and impact of AFU  
global network
Local impact and metrics of DCU  
AFU initiative
Roll-out of Autism-Friendly  
University initiativeThe number of student participants  
in global engagement initiatives
9.6 Enterprise  
EngagementDevelop an Enterprise Engagement Plan  
that focuses on creating a step-change in 
the scale and depth of our interactions 
with enterprise partners. In particular, we will leverage the opportunities provided 
by the growing enterprise base in DCU 
Alpha, the industry partners of our SFI and EI Centres, and the international network 
afforded by our Fraunhofer partnership. 
We will establish a small number of deep strategic alliances with partners aligned 
with our research priorities (ICT, Bio etc.). 
Specific initiatives will include expansion of our ‘Matchmaker’ and partner-specific 
Hackathon events. Completion and dissemination of 
Enterprise Engagement Plan
Database of DCU enterprise 
engagements
The number and scale of engagements;  
outputs and outcomes
The number of strategic  
alliance outcomes
9.7 Alumni Community Strengthen our engagement with our 
community of Alumni and enlist their support in advancing the university.  
We will establish a deeper, structured relationship at Faculty and School level and develop a clear value proposition for 
ongoing engagement of alumni with the 
University. A simplified pathway or portal for all modalities of engagement will be 
established by a renewed Alumni 
Relations Office.Creation of new alumni engagement structure at Faculty and School level 
Creation of simplified  
engagement portalArticulation of value proposition
KPIs on percentage alumni community  
connected, engaged
The number of alumni active in 
mentoring and other contributions
A rolling approach to 
planning provides DCU with an opportunity to be flexible and responsive to the 
dynamic national and 
global environment. 54   Implementation Process
55 Dublin City University Strategic Plan   2017 – 2022
Modified Rolling Planning
Building on the success of the approach 
adopted in our previous Strategic Plan 
(Transforming Lives and Societies: 2012-2017 ), 
implementation of this Strategic Plan will 
involve a process of modified Rolling Planning. 
The major modification is the introduction of 
an annual prioritisation process, whereby, for each of the nine Strategic Goals, a decision is 
made each September regarding which Specific 
Actions, underpinning each Strategic Goal, are 
to be addressed over the following 12 months.
A rolling approach to planning provides  
DCU with an opportunity to be flexible  
and responsive to the dynamic national  
and global environment.
At the end of each year of the plan, we will 
conduct a review and critical evaluation of  
the delivery and ongoing relevance of all the 
Specific Actions underpinning our nine Strategic 
Goals. In particular, we will measure annual 
progress against agreed indicators of progress (as highlighted for each Specific Action).
 
Any proposed, substantive modifications to the plan must be approved by DCU Governing 
Authority as part of an annual update to the 
Authority on progress over the previous 12 months.
Each of the nine Strategic Goals is ‘owned’ by  
a member of the DCU Senior Management 
Group (SMG) that meets weekly with the 
President. Therefore, during the course of each year, any issues that might arise regarding the 
implementation of any aspect of the plan can 
be raised at SMG and addressed speedily.The rolling planning system will enable us to 
revise and develop our Strategic Goals, where 
necessary, while maintaining a focus on our stated strategic Mission, Vision, Culture and 
Values. The annual ‘review and renew’ process 
will continue over the five-year duration of this plan. This approach will enable DCU to be  
both responsive to emerging opportunities, and alert to risks and uncertainty in our environment, especially in the funding context
Constituent Strategies
Following the launch of this Strategic Plan (Talent, Discovery, and Transformation:  
2017-2022 ) in September 2017, a process will 
commence across the University to develop the following Constituent Strategies, which will 
provide much greater detail regarding actions 
at local level to deliver on the plan:
Thematic Areas:
 — Teaching and Learning
 — Research and Innovation
 — Internationalisation
 — Engagement
 — Student Experience
Faculty Plans: — Humanities and Social Sciences
 — Engineering and Computing
 — Science and Health
 — DCU Business School
 — DCU Institute of Education
Major Units:
 — Finance
 — Human Resources
 — Operations (COO)
 
These constituent Strategies will be launched  
in February 2018. Consequently, by early 2018, 
there will be clear plans in place for all major 
elements of the University, all of which will be 
aligned with the overarching Strategic Plan.  
It is expected that all Schools and Units will 
complete local Strategic Plans in the months 
that follow.Our implementation process will 
involve annual assessment of DCU’s progress towards its goals, while simultaneously taking account of changes in the environment in  
which it operates. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCESS
56   NotesNOTES

dcu.ie

