 Freie Universität Berlin’s International Strategy 2025  
 
 Acting Globally - 
Building Networks - 
Shaping the Future  
Acting Globally - 
Building Networks - 
Shaping the Future  
Freie Universität Berlin’s International 
Strategy 2025  
Strategy Paper of the Executive Board  
April 2021  
Introduction -  
A University with Global Reach  
As one of Europe’s leading research universities, Freie Universität Berlin sees itself now and in the future 
as an academic institution with global reach. Inte rnationality has played an important role in the 
university’s research and teaching since its founding in 1948. The idea and lived reality of internationality 
has shaped the everyday experience of all university members and has been a key part of the unive rsity’s 
remarkable history. As a flagship international university located in one of Germany’s most important 
regions for research and teaching at the heart of Europe, Freie Universität Berlin plays an essential role in 
promoting Germany’s international vi sibility in the sector, not least through its networks of partnerships 
across the world.  
Freie Universität Berlin views itself as an international university. As an educational establishment it 
prides itself on its willingness to assume responsibility on a regional, national, and global scale. The 
university sees its founding principles of “Veritas, Iustitia, Libertas” not as mere words, but as values 
shaping its goals and strategies now and in the future. By connecting and educating people across the 
worl d; by campaigning for a global development based on sustainability and social justice; by engaging 
with current global challenges and integrating global perspectives in its research and teaching; and by 
taking action for democracy and academic freedom and supporting persecuted and refugee academics 
through dedicated international programs, Freie Universität Berlin shows its commitment to its founding 
principles and values.  
Freie Universität Berlin is a cosmopolitan institution, and working internationally is an everyday 
experience. Supporting every member of the university to implement this internationality in research, in 
teaching and learning, and in the workplace is therefore integral to the university’s philosophy. The 
benefits can be immense, and as a result, university structures must give every member of the university 
– whether in research, teaching, or administration – the chance and the ability to think transnationally 
and take responsibility for the global impact of their actions. We call this “th e global campus.”  
Freie Universität’s international strategy prioritizes overarching structural themes. These include quality 
assurance and continually advancing our research and teaching; playing our part in the expansion of 
global knowledge; and strengt hening the circulation of knowledge between different locations. In this 
sense, the university believes it has a part to play in the development of society overall. Another main 
aspect of our international strategy is to create a university that is fit for  the future and can compete in a 
global arena when it comes to education and research.  
The International Strategy 2025 builds on the work and outcomes of the previous strategy paper 
(2016/2020), and on structures and formats that have come out of the Exce llence Strategy and other 
university -wide processes. Its aim is to consolidate achievements in the area of internationality in every 
area of the university and to expand them to shape the future of Freie Universität Berlin as a global 
university.  
 
Strategic  Goals and Measures (2021 –2025)  
The goals and measures set out in this International Strategy form part of a new overall strategy for Freie 
Universität Berlin. They should be understood within the greater context of complementary processes 
with which they  align, for example, the ongoing strategy process for teaching and education, the process 
of building an academic research profile, the strategic digitalization of teaching and research, the 
Diversity Audit, and long -term planning in the departments.  
The measures listed below are to be implemented at a central level. At the same time, all areas of the 
university are invited to develop and implement decentralized measures to achieve these strategic goals.  
Our accomplishments to date have seen international ization measures implemented in a variety of ways 
both within Freie Universität Berlin as a whole and within its various departments and institutes. They 
form the basis for the goals and measures set out in this document, which aim to accentuate the 
univer sity’s global visibility by complementing and strengthening existing and previous 
internationalization activities, rather than competing with them. In defining its goals and measures, Freie 
Universität Berlin has also benefited from existing structures tha t align with its conviction that successful 
research institutions can only fully unfold their potential as part of wider networks:  
° Una Europa , the European universities network , is fast becoming a dynamic engine driving 
the testing and development of in novative cooperation formats in teaching, education, and 
research. The alliance offers opportunities for us to learn from each other, setting a benchmark 
for potentially all forms of intensified European networking and collaboration. Una Europa also 
serves  to strengthen shared European values at all levels of the university.  
° The university’s Strategic Partnerships and transnational networks support the goals of 
Freie Universitä t Berlin through a variety of different focuses and instruments. As especially 
trusted partners, they also facilitate cutting -edge work on complex and innovative joint projects 
– from the pilot phase to full implementation.  
° Freie Universität’s network o f liaison offices with current locations in Delhi, Cairo, Moscow, 
Beijing, and São Paulo is an invaluable pillar of our international strategy. The network helps to 
bring new, regionally specific expertise to the university and is regularly evaluated. As l ocal 
hubs, the offices act as first points of contact for people based in the respective regions who are 
interested in studying, researching, or otherwise working with Freie Universität.  
° The internationalization measures implemented within the Berlin Un iversity Alliance are 
generally measures whose added value is derived from bundling the expertise of the BUA 
partners. As such, these measures complement those of Freie Universität.  
The global context in which this strategy will unfold is characterized by  two phenomena that are already 
having far -reaching consequences in the world of internationalization and will only become more 
significant in the future.  
First, this strategy particularly acknowledges the digitalization of research, teaching, and educati on that 
has been accelerated hugely by the Covid -19 pandemic. Strategically, digitalization must be seen as a 
cross -cutting theme for all areas of the university's international work.  
Second, the global climate crisis has led to a different way of thinking and a new assessment of 
sustainability and mobility in a university context. Freie Universität is committed to becoming a climate -
neutral university. Every measure set out in this str ategy is therefore based on the principle of combining 
high quality international cooperation with a simultaneous reduction in physical mobility with its 
environmentally damaging implications.  
A 
A. An International University Culture  
All members of the un iversity must be able to participate in its culture of internationality. This culture 
must be visible and authentic for both university members and the wider public, and as such, 
communicated in ways that are appropriate and effective. This means that the university – in the sense of 
both the physical campus and the lived university experienced as a shared space, whether online or on -
site – must continue the process of becoming a place characterized by a global perspective and global 
responsibility, by cult ural and linguistic diversity, and by a commitment to academic freedom and an 
enlightened tolerance that extends beyond the formal period of study or research to form part of the 
self-understanding of our alumni.  
Measures  
A01: Develop targeted instrument s in the context of the university’s overall communication strategy to 
promote the established brand “International Network University” both internally to the university 
community and externally to a German and international public. This includes campaigns  that 
address specific target groups and themed activities and events (Goals 1 and 2).  
A02: Implement bilingualism (German -English) systematically through the translation of all relevant 
documents, websites, and marketing materials, and mandatory communic ation in both languages 
for all cross -university events, websites, documents etc., to be facilitated through language training 
in German and English for all staff (Goal 3).  
A03: Establish an “internationality quality circle” working group for a fixed 12 -month period comprising a 
representative from each unit within the administration and central facilities, with the task of 
developing specific measures for each of the represented areas (Goals 1 and 3).  
A04: Continue to implement processes and procedures i n relation to the goals and rules set out in the 
2020 Strategy Paper “Internationalization and Academic Freedom” (Goal 2).  
A05: Establish internationality as an important cross -cutting theme in all planning processes at the 
university (Goal 1).  
 
B. Internationality in Research  
Research is international by nature. Questions and hypotheses can only emerge out of a continual flow of 
ideas and communication across borders. This ongoing dialogue is essential for the constant evaluation of 
academic and  scientific standards and practices, which in turn underpins research results of the very 
highest caliber. Similarly, research careers are increasingly international in scope. To recruit the best 
academic and scientific staff, the university must think glo bally. Collaborative approaches and the free 
circulation of knowledge increase the outcomes, reach, and impact of research. As a result, Freie 
Universität Berlin actively promotes international joint research projects, both through partnerships with 
intern ational institutions relevant to the specific project, and through supporting the international 
networks of individual researchers.  
 
Goals  
4. To continue to develop the quality and quality standards of Freie Universität’s research through 
supporting partnerships with outstanding international institutions and individuals across the globe.  
5. To actively recruit outstanding international researchers to Freie Universität Berlin.  
6. To understand the importance of international partnerships when managing, funding, and evaluating 
academic and scientific achievements.  
 
Measures  
B01: Identify and systematically remove barriers to international research partnerships and gather 
examples of go od practice together with standardized processes that can be used across all 
departments (Goals 4 -6).  
B02: Introduce an electronic chipcard for visiting researchers so that they can easily use university services 
during their stay (Goal 5).  
B03: Implemen t mandatory international “scouting” during appointment procedures (Goal 5).  
B04: Expand incentives and support structures for participating in international, externally funded grant 
programs (Goals 4 and 6).  
 
C. Internationality in Teaching and Education  
Through the continuing internationalization of the formal curriculum as well as informal kinds of learning 
(e.g., advisory services, supporting classes, and extracurricular activities), Freie Universität Berlin offers all 
students the opportunity to prepar e themselves for a life in a globalized world (and workplace), and a 
chance to experience the value of transnational cooperation and intercultural encounters. All students, 
no matter what they are studying, can benefit from these opportunities. While they include programs 
that involve physical mobility, opportunities are extending to meet the needs of a diverse student 
population through innovative, participatory, digital scenarios for teaching and study, including “virtual 
mobility.”  
Goals  
7. To make it possible for all Freie Universität Berlin students to gain a meaningful international 
experience during their studies; this could entail physically studying abroad, a virtual partnership 
format, or a form of “internationalization at home.”  
8. To integrate  specific international content in as many classes and learning formats as possible, to 
accentuate Freie Universität Berlin’s reputation as a university for degree programs with global 
reach.  
9. To increase the attraction of our degree programs and other courses for non -German students 
through English -language degrees, intensive courses, and joint degree programs with international 
partners.  
10. To create support structures (including the required infrastructure) to empower all students to feel 
confident studying and interacting at an international level, but also to give teaching and advising 
staff the skills they need to work with students from the most diverse educational backgrounds.  
Measures  
C01: Identify and systematically remove structural barriers to the internationalization of teaching and 
education; gather examples of good practice and processes that can be used across all departments 
(Goals 7 -10).  
C02: Develop a handbook for departments with models of how teaching and education can be 
internationalized, with a particular focus on digital and hybrid formats such as blended/virtual 
mobility; support the introduction of online teaching in an international context (Goals 7 -9).  
C03: Develop the concept of a cross -departmental General Professional Skills (ABV) course “International 
Competence” to be integrated into the existing ABV curriculum, bundling language training, 
intercultural compete nces, specific training for the international jobs market, etc. (Goal 8).  
C04: Expand and strengthen language courses for all instructors and students, especially in the two core 
working languages German and English (Goals 9 and 10).  
C05: Develop a holis tic approach to prepare, advise, and accompany all students on their learning journey 
that is adapted to meet the needs of individual, international educational backgrounds.  
C06: Establish a committee of relevant stakeholders that is tasked with simplifyi ng online admission, 
authentication, and recognition processes between Freie Universität Berlin and international higher education 
institutions (Goals 9 and 10).  
 
D. Internationality for Staff  
All staff of Freie Universität Berlin will be helped to develo p their international skills, with ongoing 
professionalization measures empowering them to contribute autonomously to the internationalization 
of our university. This can be done, for example, through consciously promoting linguistic and 
intercultural skil ls along with an understanding of how the university operates with its various global 
connections and networks. At the senior management level, the university will align its decision -making 
and actions with international good practice and seek out exchange  and comparisons with leading 
institutions.  
Goals  
11. To create a broad awareness within the university of internationality as a central, cross -cutting theme 
at Freie Universität Berlin.  
12. To develop existing international and intercultural knowledge and skills among university staff and 
make active use of these.  
13. To empower administration and management teams at all levels to actively shape internationalization.  
Measures  
D01: Develop and implement a staff recruitment strategy that fully acknowled ges and aligns with the 
increasing internationalization of Freie Universität (Goals 11 -13).  
D02: Consult regularly with international partners. This should be carried out by the heads of university 
management to gather examples and ideas of best practice, but should also include consultations on 
specific areas at the departmental level and with indivi dual units and teams (Goal 13).  
D03: Expand training and development opportunities for support staff, including participating in 
international networks and implementing online exchange formats with partner institutions (Goals 
11-13).  
D04: Create a new “internationalization representative” for each department and central institute 
through the inclusion of this measure in the targ et agreements with the departments and deans’ 
offices (Goal 13).  
D05: Promote the participation of teaching staff in mobility programs and other internationalization 
schemes in order to build and share international teaching experience (Goals 8, 12, and 1 3). 
 
 
2025  
Acting Globally - 
Building Networks - 
Shaping the Future  
Freie Universität Berlin’s International Strategy 2025  
 
